Causes of Climate Change
Burning fossil fuels, cutting down forests and farming livestock are increasingly influencing the climate and the earth’s temperature.


This adds enormous amounts of greenhouse gases to those naturally occurring in the atmosphere, increasing the greenhouse effect and global warming.


Global warming
2011-2020 was the warmest decade recorded, with global average temperature reaching 1.1°C above pre-industrial levels in 2019. Human-induced global warming is presently increasing at a rate of 0.2°C per decade.


An increase of 2°C compared to the temperature in pre-industrial times is associated with serious negative impacts on to the natural environment and human health and wellbeing, including a much higher risk that dangerous and possibly catastrophic changes in the global environment will occur.


For this reason, the international community has recognised the need to keep warming well below 2°C and pursue efforts to limit it to 1.5°C.


Greenhouse gases
The main driver of climate change is the greenhouse effect. Some gases in the Earth's atmosphere act a bit like the glass in a greenhouse, trapping the sun's heat and stopping it from leaking back into space and causing global warming.


Many of these greenhouse gases occur naturally, but human activities are increasing the concentrations of some of them in the atmosphere, in particular:


* carbon dioxide (CO2)
* methane
* nitrous oxide
* fluorinated gases
* CO2 produced by human activities is the largest contributor to global warming. By 2020, its concentration in the atmosphere had risen to 48% above its pre-industrial level (before 1750).


Other greenhouse gases are emitted by human activities in smaller quantities. Methane is a more powerful greenhouse gas than CO2, but has a shorter atmospheric lifetime. Nitrous oxide, like CO2, is a long-lived greenhouse gas that accumulates in the atmosphere over decades to centuries. Non-greenhouse gas pollutants, including aerosols like soot, have different warming and cooling effects and are also associated with other issues such as poor air quality.


Natural causes, such as changes in solar radiation or volcanic activity are estimated to have contributed less than plus or minus 0.1°C to total warming between 1890 and 2010.


Causes for rising emissions


* Burning coal, oil and gas produces carbon dioxide and nitrous oxide.
* Cutting down forests (deforestation). Trees help to regulate the climate by absorbing CO2 from the atmosphere. When they are cut down, that beneficial effect is lost and the carbon stored in the trees is released into the atmosphere, adding to the greenhouse effect.
* Increasing livestock farming. Cows and sheep produce large amounts of methane when they digest their food.
* Fertilisers containing nitrogen produce nitrous oxide emissions.
* Fluorinated gases are emitted from equipment and products that use these gases. Such emissions have a very strong warming effect, up to 23 000 times greater than CO2.


Countering climate change
Asevery tonne of CO2 emitted contributes to global warming, all emissions reductions contribute to slowing it down. In order to stop global warming completely, CO2 emissions have to reach net zero worldwide. In addition, reducing emissions of other greenhouse gases, such as methane, can also have a powerful effect on slowing global warming – especially in the short term.


The consequences of climate changeSearch for available translations of the preceding linkEN are extremely serious, and affect many aspects of our lives. Both countering climate change and adapting to a warming world are top priorities for the EU.We need climate action now.


What is the most important cause of climate change?
Human activity is the main cause of climate change. People burn fossil fuels and convert land from forests to agriculture. Since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, people have burned more and more fossil fuels and changed vast areas of land from forests to farmland.


Burning fossil fuels produces carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas. It is called a greenhouse gas because it produces a “greenhouse effect”. The greenhouse effect makes the earth warmer, just as a greenhouse is warmer than its surroundings.


Carbon dioxide is the main cause of human-induced climate change.


It stays in the atmosphere for a very long time. Other greenhouse gases, such as nitrous oxide, stay in the atmosphere for a long time. Other substances only produce short-term effects.


Not all substances produce warming. Some, like certain aerosols, can produce cooling.


What are climate forcers?
Carbon dioxide and other substances are referred to as climate forcers because they force or push the climate towards being warmer or cooler. They do this by affecting the flow of energy coming into and leaving the earth’s climate system.


Small changes in the sun’s energy that reaches the earth can cause some climate change. But since the Industrial Revolution, adding greenhouse gases has been over 50 times more powerful than changes in the Sun's radiance. The additional greenhouse gases in earth’s atmosphere have had a strong warming effect on earth’s climate.


Future emissions of greenhouse gases, particularly carbon dioxide, will determine how much more climate warming occurs.


What can be done about climate change?
Carbon dioxide is the main cause of human-induced global warming and associated climate change. It is a very long-lived gas, which means carbon dioxide builds up in the atmosphere with ongoing human emissions and remains in the atmosphere for centuries. Global warming can only be stopped by reducing global emissions of carbon dioxide from human fossil fuel combustion and industrial processes to zero, but even with zero emissions, the global temperature will remain essentially constant at its new warmer level. Emissions of other substances that warm the climate must also be substantially reduced. This indicates how difficult the challenge is.


What is climate change?
Climate change is a long-term shift in weather conditions identified by changes in temperature, precipitation, winds, and other indicators. Climate change can involve both changes in average conditions and changes in variability, including, for example, extreme events.


The earth's climate is naturally variable on all time scales. However, its long-term state and average temperature are regulated by the balance between incoming and outgoing energy, which determines the Earth's energy balance. Any factor that causes a sustained change to the amount of incoming energy or the amount of outgoing energy can lead to climate change. Different factors operate on different time scales, and not all of those factors that have been responsible for changes in earth's climate in the distant past are relevant to contemporary climate change. Factors that cause climate change can be divided into two categories ­- those related to natural processes and those related to human activity. In addition to natural causes of climate change, changes internal to the climate system, such as variations.


Ocean currents or atmospheric circulation, can also influence the climate for short periods of time. This natural internal climate variability is superimposed on the long-term forced climate change.


Does climate change have natural causes?
The Earth's climate can be affected by natural factors that are external to the climate system, such as changes in volcanic activity, solar output, and the Earth's orbit around the Sun. Of these, the two factors relevant on timescales of contemporary climate change are changes in volcanic activity and changes in solar radiation. In terms of the Earth's energy balance, these factors primarily influence the amount of incoming energy. Volcanic eruptions are episodic and have relatively short-term effects on climate. Changes in solar irradiance have contributed to climate trends over the past century but since the Industrial Revolution, the effect of additions of greenhouse gases to the atmosphere has been over 50 times that of changes in the Sun's output.


Human causes
Climate change can also be caused by human activities, such as the burning of fossil fuels and the conversion of land for forestry and agriculture. Since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, these human influences on the climate system have increased substantially. In addition to other environmental impacts, these activities change the land surface and emit various substances to the atmosphere. These in turn can influence both the amount of incoming energy and the amount of outgoing energy and can have both warming and cooling effects on the climate.  The dominant product of fossil fuel combustion is carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas. The overall effect of human activities since the Industrial Revolution has been a warming effect, driven primarily by emissions of carbon dioxide and enhanced by emissions of other greenhouse gases.


The build-up of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere has led to an enhancement of the natural greenhouse effect.  It is this human-induced enhancement of the greenhouse effect that is of concern because ongoing emissions of greenhouse gases have the potential to warm the planet to levels that have never been experienced in the history of human civilization. Such climate change could have far-reaching and/or unpredictable environmental, social, and economic consequences.


Short-lived and long-lived climate forcers
Carbon dioxide is the main cause of human-induced climate change. It has been emitted in vast quantities from the burning of fossil fuels and it is a very long-lived gas, which means it continues to affect the climate system during its long residence time in the atmosphere. However, fossil fuel combustion, industrial processes, agriculture, and forestry-related activities emit other substances that also act as climate forcers. Some, such as nitrous oxide, are long-lived greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide, and so contribute to long-term climate change. Other substances have shorter atmospheric lifetimes because they are removed fairly quickly from the atmosphere. Therefore, their effect on the climate system is similarly short-lived. Together, these short-lived climate forces are responsible for a significant amount of current climate forcing from anthropogenic substances. Some short-lived climate forcers have a climate warming effect (‘positive climate forcers') while others have a cooling effect (‘negative climate forcers').


If atmospheric levels of short-lived climate forcers are continually replenished by ongoing emissions, these continue to exert a climate forcing. However, reducing emissions will quite quickly lead to reduced atmospheric levels of such substances. A number of short-lived climate forcers have climate warming effects and together are the most important contributors to the human enhancement of the greenhouse effect after carbon dioxide. This includes methane and tropospheric ozone – both greenhouse gases – and black carbon, a small solid particle formed from the incomplete combustion of carbon-based fuels (coal, oil and wood for example).


Other short-lived climate forcers have climate cooling effects, most notably sulphate aerosols. Fossil fuel combustion emits sulphur dioxide into the atmosphere (in addition to carbon dioxide) which then combines with water vapour to form tiny droplets (aerosols) which reflect sunlight. Sulphate aerosols remain in the atmosphere for only a few days (washing out in what is referred to as acid rain), and so do not have the same long-term effect as greenhouse gases. The cooling from sulphate aerosols in the atmosphere has, however, offset some of the warming from other substances. That is, the warming we have experienced to date would have been even larger had it not been for elevated levels of sulphate aerosols in the atmosphere.


Do Nuclear Power Plants Cause Pollution?
Nuclear energy is one of the most efficient and clean forms of energy. It releases a very less amount of carbon dioxide as compared to other sources of energy. The nuclear power plant is a thermal power station in which water is heated to produce steam. A nuclear power plant consists of different buildings which include turbine building, pressurized reaction chamber, cooling chamber, and so on.


The turbine building consists of many turbines as well as the generator necessary for electrical power generation. The nuclear reactor is in the containment building which is made up of reinforced concrete. The reinforced concrete used in the containment building is 1 meter thick that prevents radiation to leak. There is a cooling tower in the nuclear power plant where hot water is cooled and sent back to the containment building.


The steam produced is used to rotate a turbine to produce electrical energy. Heat is produced by nuclear fission in which atoms split to release thermal energy. This reaction takes place in a pressurised reactor vessel. The pressurised reactor vessel houses hundreds of fuel assemblies.


A single fuel assembly is composed of many fuel rods. The nuclear fuel is contained in the fuel rod. These fuel rods are composed of uranium or other heavy elements that make the nuclear chain reaction possible. Thermal energy is released in the fission chain reaction.


At this stage, the water is needed to absorb thermal energy released from the chain reaction. This water does not boil as the pressure is maintained by the pressurizer. The heated water travels to a heat exchanger where it heats the pipes of the heat exchanger which has water.


This water begins to boil and eventually converts to steam. The steam produced is fed into the turbine building with the help of pipes. After this stage, the steam is converted back into the water using a condenser. It is then returned to the heat exchanger and reused. However, the water used for cooling in the condenser is taken from nearby natural water bodies and is not reused.


Do Nuclear Power Plants Cause Pollution?
Nuclear power plants use uranium as a fuel to produce thermal energy. The mining process of uranium releases carbon dioxide that causes pollution. Therefore, setting up new nuclear power plants releases carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. Nuclear power plants produce at least three types of waste streams that have adverse effects on the environment. The three waste streams are:


* Spent nuclear fuel which includes fission products and plutonium waste.
* Tailings and waste rock at uranium mining mills.
* Releases of ill-defined quantities of radioactive materials during accidents.


Apart from the production of waste, water pollution is the main problem associated with nuclear power. Also, the operation of nuclear power plants does not cause any air pollution and due to this reason, it is considered one of the cleanest sources of energy.


Do Nuclear Power Plants Cause Radiation?
The nuclear material is one of the most poisonous substances on earth. However, most of the radiation of an operating plant is blocked by its structure or is dissipated into the water source. This reduces the amount of radioactivity to a point that it is difficult to measure.


However, many accidents have taken place where nuclear power plants have leaked a significant amount of radiation. An operating nuclear power plant exhausts gases that are radioactive to some extent.


Furthermore, boiling water reactors in plants have air ejectors whose exhaust is also radioactive. Such exhausts are made to pass through delay pipes, hydrogen recombines, and storage tanks before they are released into the atmosphere to ensure that radiation levels are in accordance with the regulations.


Nuclear fuel like uranium can be used for a specific amount of time. After this, it is considered a waste and needs to be isolated due to the emission of radiation. Most of this is stored in water which shields the environment from the radiation.


However, if any system in the nuclear power plant fails, nuclear waste releases radiation which is harmful to the environment. This radioactive waste is a huge concern as it remains active for hundreds and thousands of years.




How do Nuclear Power Plants Affect the Environment?
The setting up of nuclear power plants requires a large area. Therefore, forests are cleared and this disturbs the natural habitat of flora and fauna. The ecological balance in the area is also disturbed.


Also, nuclear power plants need water for cooling purposes. First of all, the cooling system obtains water from the oceans and seas which pulls fish along with it. This intake of fish kills them.


Secondly, after the cooling procedure is done the water is returned to the water bodies. The water that is returned is at least 25 degrees warmer than the water that was taken originally. This harms the different aquatic plants and animals.


The functioning of nuclear power plants also releases sulphur dioxide that causes air pollution. This causes acid rain which reduces the productivity of soil, contaminates water bodies, and affects vegetation.


Do Nuclear Power Plants Pollute Water?
Two different water streams are used in nuclear power plant process that is:


* Process water
* Cooling water


Process water travels to the reaction chamber where it is heated and vaporized to steam. This steam is then passed over the turbines that start rotating and produce electrical energy. This steam is reused, condensed, and sent back to the reaction chamber.


The cooling water travels from the natural water bodies to cool the process water. Cooling water is not reused and it is sent back to water bodies. The water sent back has a higher temperature and it affects the ecosystem of the water bodies.


The rise in temperature of water bodies depletes the oxygen levels in water and increases pH. This is because warm water cannot hold oxygen like cold water. In warmer temperatures, organic matter decomposes at a rapid rate. This increase in decomposed matter leads to the growth of algal blooms that leads to eutrophication.


Algae is a food source for aerobic microbes that increase in population and decrease the oxygen levels. Many organisms cannot survive in low oxygen levels and eventually die. In addition to this, warm water increases the metabolism of cold-blooded marine animals like fish. This causes malnutrition due to the limited amount of food available.


Do Nuclear Power Plants Pollute the Air?
Nuclear power is one of the cleanest forms of energy as it does not cause air pollution while operating. However, while mining and refining uranium ore, fossil fuels are used which when burnt emit gases into the atmosphere.


Nuclear energy causes the least pollution as compared to other energy sources. It can help reduce air pollution-related health problems in humans as well as animals.


Is it Safe to Live Near a Nuclear Power Plant?
There has been a growing concern about the safety of living near nuclear power plants. Living near a nuclear power plant does not pose a risk and according to experts, it is safe to live near a nuclear power plant.


However, the only problem with nuclear power plants is the accidents linked to it which are extremely rare. A nuclear accident poses mainly two health threats which are:


* Direct radiation
* Ingestion


Direct radiation spreads away from the source at a quick pace. Ingestion poses a greater health risk for the people living around. Radioactive isotopes become airborne after an explosion and ingestion of these isotopes can lead to thyroid cancer or other different cancers.